The measure drew criticism from the Bush administration and a parting shot from financier Donald Trump , who yesterday withdrew his takeover bid for AMR Corp. , the parent of American Airlines .
In a letter to subcommittee Chairman James Oberstar ( D. , Minn. ) , Mr. Trump criticized the bill as an explicit effort to thwart his bid for AMR , and said it contributed to the collapse of the deal .
Elaine Chao , deputy transportation secretary , also sent a letter to express the administration  opposition to the bill `` in its present form . ''
Rep. Oberstar brushed off Mr. Trump  allegations as an `` excuse for his own deal failing . ''
He also said the fact that the other letter had n't come from Transportation Secretary Samuel Skinner indicated there is `` wiggle room '' in the administration  position .
Mr. Oberstar and other committee members repeatedly stressed that the legislation was n't a response to any particular market situation .
But they cited the UAL and AMR examples as reasons to move quickly to enact this legislation .
Aides both in the House and Senate said the withdrawal of the Trump bid for AMR is n't likely to deflate efforts to push the legislation .
`` It  still on the fast track and we still want to do it , '' said one Senate aide .
The bill is aimed at addressing the concern that an airline might sacrifice costly safety measures to pay off the debt incurred in a leveraged buy-out .
Currently , the transportation secretary does n't have clearly established authority to block mergers , but can take the drastic step of revoking the operating certificate of any carrier the official considers unfit .
Supporters of the legislation view the bill as an effort to add stability and certainty to the airline-acquisition process , and to preserve the safety and fitness of the industry .
In general , the bill would give the Transportation Department a 30-day review period before 15 % or more of the voting stock of a major U.S. air carrier could be acquired .
It also would require the acquiring party to notify the transportation secretary and to provide all information relevant to determining the intent of the acquisition .
The bill would allow the secretary to reject a buy-out if sufficient information has n't been provided , or if the buy-out is likely to weaken the carrier financially , result in a substantial reduction in size of the airline through disposal of assets , or give control to a foreign interest .
If more information is needed , the secretary would have authority to extend the review period 20 days .
All the witnesses , both congressmen and industry experts , expressed support for the bill in order to prevent profiteers from cashing in on airline profits at the expense of safe , cost-effective service .
But several committee members disapproved , some backing Mr. Trump  claim that the threat of regulation caused the failure of the UAL deal and the stock-market plunge .
One of the major concerns expressed by the dissenters was that large airlines would be prohibited from divesting themselves of smaller entities and producing independent spin-off companies .
In a possible prelude to the resumption of talks between Boeing Co. and striking Machinists union members , a federal mediator said representatives of the two sides will meet with him tomorrow .
`` It could be a long meeting or it could be a short one , '' said Doug Hammond , the mediator , who called the agreement to meet a first step toward a resumption of negotiations .
`` We 're encouraged that talks are scheduled again but beyond that , we have made no expression of expectations , '' a Boeing spokesman said .
The Machinists union has rejected a three-year contract offer that would have provided a 10 % wage increase over the life of the pact , plus some bonuses .
Currently , average pay for machinists is $ 13.39 an hour , Boeing said .
Now in its 13th day , the strike has idled about 55,000 machinists and has started to delay delivery of some jetliners .
With a strike fund of about $ 100 million , the union had said it was prepared for a long strike .
After the third week on strike , union members will begin receiving $ 100 a week from the fund .
Work at Boeing continues with supervisors and other non-striking personnel manning the lines .
And at the company  Wichita , Kan. , plant , about 2,400 of the 11,700 machinists still are working , Boeing said .
Under Kansas right-to-work laws , contracts can not require workers to be union members .
Boeing has declined to say how many employees are working at its giant Renton , Wash. , plant .
Union officials could n't be reached for comment .
DPC Acquisition Partners , a hostile suitor for Dataproducts Corp. , said it intends to launch a tender offer for the computer printer maker  common stock .
DPC , a group led by the New York investment firm Crescott Inc. , also said it plans to file preliminary materials with the Securities and Exchange Commission regarding a shareholder solicitation to oust Dataproducts ' board .
DPC holds a 7.8 % stake in Dataproducts and made a $ 15-a-share bid for the company in May , but Dataproducts management considered the $ 283.7 million proposal unacceptable .
A DPC spokesman declined to elaborate on the group  new plan .
In American Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday , Dataproducts shares jumped 62.5 cents to close at $ 9.375 .
Dataproducts , which had been seeking a buyer for several months , announced a restructuring plan in September and took itself off the auction block .
